title: Getting Started with Reason and BuckleScript
featured: false
author: Jared Forsyth
tags:
  - javascript
  - reason
  - ocaml
categories:
  - javascript
description: A short tutorial aimed at JavaScript developers
date: 2017-06-03 20:25:00
---
A couple of people have asked me how to get up and running recently, so I thought I'd put something together. If you're looking for a "just clone this repo & go", [here's a very simple boilerplate](https://github.com/jaredly/reason-bucklescript-example) I put together for this post, or you can check out the [reason-react-example](https://github.com/chenglou/reason-react-example) repository.

<!-- more -->

### What's [Reason](http://facebook.github.io/reason/)?

Reason is a transpiler for OCaml. It allows you to use a syntax that's much more familiar to javascript developers (and anyone coming from a C-like syntax), and also supports JSX.

### What's [OCaml](https://ocaml.org/)?

OCaml is one of those languages that gets listed on "5 programming languages that will change the way you think about programming."

It's been around for a long time (~20 years), but the community has stayed small and fairly focused on academia. Because of this, community resources are sparse, documentation is worse than other modern languages, and it's historically taken a ton of effort to even install and manage packages.

The Reason initiative is very focused on making it easier for newcomers to learn OCaml and join the community.

### What's [BuckleScript](https://github.com/bucklescript/bucklescript)?

BuckleScript (by [Bob Zhang](https://github.com/bobzhang) over at Bloomberg) is a new backend for the ocaml compiler, which takes OCaml (or Reason) code and produces performant, readable JavaScript. It has [excellent documentation](http://bucklescript.github.io/bucklescript/Manual.html), very readable output, and easy-to-use interop with JavaScript.

## Installation

You can just `git clone` https://github.com/jaredly/reason-bucklescript-example to get ahead of the game if you want.

> I'm assuming you're on a unix-like machine (linux or mac), but BuckleScript also works on windows!

```bash
mkdir my-new-project
cd my-new-project
echo {} > package.json # shortcut to avoid answering any 'npm init' questions
npm install bs-platform
```

Installing `bs-plaform` will take a little time (~30 seconds on my macbook pro), because it's building the BuckleScript compiler for you.

> The version of bs-platform that I installed was `1.7.4`, so if yours is later, some details might be different. Buckelscript includes reason, so it's the only thing you have to install!

Then make a `bsconfig.json` file that looks like this

```json
{
  "name": "my-new-project",
  "sources": "src"
}
```

## Your first file

In `src/hello.re`, put:

```ocaml
Js.log "hello";
```

Now to compile, run `./node_modules/.bin/bsb -make-world`.
And now run the compiled javascript with `node ./lib/js/src/hello.js`!

```bash
$ node ./lib/js/src/hello.js
hello
```

If you take a peek at the compiled javascript, this is what you get:

```javascript
// Generated by BUCKLESCRIPT VERSION 1.7.4, PLEASE EDIT WITH CARE
'use strict';
console.log("hello");
```

Pretty nice!

## Bundling for the web

> If you're targeting node, then you can skip this part. BuckleScript's javascript output has all the `require`s you need for node to be happy.

Once you have more than one file, you'll need a bundler like webpack or rollup. Here's my simple `webpack.config.js` (go ahead and `npm install webpack` to install it as well).

```javascript
module.exports = {
  entry: './lib/js/src/hello.js',
  output: {
    path: __dirname +'/public',
    filename: 'bundle.js',
  },
};
```

And here's a basic html file to put in `./public/index.html`

```html
<!doctype html>
<meta charset="UTF-8">
<title>Hello Reason</title>
<script src="./bundle.js"></script>
```

Now run `./node_modules/.bin/webpack` and `open ./public/index.html` and you're good to go!

## What's next?

If you need a primer on the syntax, the [Reason documentation](http://facebook.github.io/reason/) has a useful list of javascript comparisons.

I'm also writing a post about BuckleScript interop that should be helpful 😄.

If you're interested in using React, you can take a look at the `react-reason-example` repository.

If you have questions or just want to hang out, [join us on Discord!](https://discord.gg/reasonml)
